Jim James

Photo: Erika Goldring/WireImage via Getty Images

Music News

Singer/songwriter Jim James talks about how My Morning Jacket's hiatus and 2019 reunion led to the band's new self-titled new album—plus how we should stop living so much in the digital world and embrace nature and love

Sometimes a little self-love can go a long way to connecting with the world around us. That's one of the key messages ofMy Morning Jacket's latest single "Love Love Love," from the band's new self-titled album due out Oct. 22.

"'Love Love Love' is just about trying to spread as much love as you can, but that it starts with you standing up for and loving yourself," singer/songwriterJim Jamestells GRAMMY.com. "I want to try and spread as much positivity as I or we can, which obviously isn't always easy."

<style>.embed-container { position: relative; padding-bottom: 56.25%; height: 0; overflow: hidden; max-width: 100%; } .embed-container iframe, .embed-container object, .embed-container embed { position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%; }</style><div class='embed-container'><iframe src='https://www.youtube.com/embed/c-8hD7N2AOE' frameborder='0' allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

The new album is the band's first collection of new music since they recordedThe WaterfallandThe Waterfall II, released in 2015 and 2020, respectively, but recorded during the same sessions.

It finds the band rediscovering and embracing their passion for playing together after time apart doing their own projects. The band decided to self-produce, which allowed them total freedom to let the songs breathe and develop over two multi-week sessions at Los Angeles-based studio 64 Sound.

"It was a beautiful experience, and we were so fortunate to get to spend some time together just the five of us reconnecting with each other as friends and making music together," he says. "We had been apart for a while as a band and were not sure what the future held and so it was such magic to find ourselves together again and laughing and sharing and creating."

GRAMMY.com caught up with James to talk about the importance of breaking free from technology and embracing the natural world, how the band found complete freedom in self-producing the album, and more.

How have you grown the most as a songwriter and individual during the past year and a half?

At least for me, it has just reinforced my love of nature, my desire to really focus my time with the people that mean the most to me. I really tried to stop doing things that I felt like I was obligated to do. I feel like just so much in life we run around almost in an unconscious way.

The pandemic has, at least for me, introduced this new level of consciousness, of trying to be super aware of how I'm spending my time. It kind of brought this new awareness that we don't have forever, and the future is not guaranteed. And that we really need to make every day count, and really spend it with people that we love, and doing things that we love.

Speaking of love, the new single on the new album is "Love Love Love," which is about positivity and love for one another. Why is it important to keep a level of hope and positivity?

"Love Love Love" is just about trying to spread as much love as you can, but that it starts with you standing up for and loving yourself. I want to try and spread as much positivity as I or we can, which obviously isn't always easy. I tend to write a lot about feeling lost or sad or like I don't fit in. But I also want to weave messages of hope or positivity in there which I hope could maybe get through to someone else who may be feeling lost or sad and let them know there is a way out of the sadness…that things can and do change.

Life can be so hard, and it can be easier to dwell on the tough times, but I feel like it's also our sacred duty to celebrate when things are good, to name those feelings and those moments and speak them out loud. Like, "Wow this is such a beautiful moment!" or being sure to tell our loved ones how much we love them and how special they are.

I think also along with this, we need to all start meeting each other in the middle more. [We need to] turn off the cable news channels and listen to each other more and recognize our shared humanity and resonance with all the other beings and this beautiful planet before it's too late.

The sentiment lyrically is just to stand up for yourself, learn to love yourself and then use that to spread as much love to others as possible.

How would you describe the song's development?

It started in two different directions. One was a sort of moody psychedelic thing and the other was this propulsive electronic beat I was working on. Somewhere along the way I decided to merge the two in the demo I sent to the band. We ended up making it a more live organic electric hybrid thing by performing around the drum programming I had created originally.

<style>.embed-container { position: relative; padding-bottom: 56.25%; height: 0; overflow: hidden; max-width: 100%; } .embed-container iframe, .embed-container object, .embed-container embed { position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%; }</style><div class='embed-container'><iframe src='https://www.youtube.com/embed/S2aa-zCtay8' frameborder='0' allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

There was a point where you and the band weren't sure if you'd ever release another album. However, reuniting for a few shows in 2019 including a couple at Red Rocks helped reignite the spark. How did all that help convince everyone to get back into the studio?

I think it just really showed us that balance is so important to life. I feel like life just got so out of balance for so long that I had to find a way to create that balance. I was really bad at saying yes to too many things, and then getting just too beaten down by life.

I didn't have the energy I needed for the things I loved, because I was saying yes to too many different things. So, I think once we had taken some time away, and weren't so beaten down by the schedule of the band, we were able to feel the energy again and feel the essence of playing together.

The band made a concerted effort to capture the raw energy from the band's live performance in the recordings. Why was that important?

We just kind of went in with no pressure on ourselves. And no goal, really, other than to have fun and just try things. Also, it was just the five of us together, which was really special, too. It just enabled us to kind of focus on our friendship and the energy between us in this really special way that kind of just removed all the pressure.

And we got to spend some nice time [together], just letting things fly and trying out ideas. And just enjoying the gift of friendship, and the gift to being able to play, create music together. I think that resulted in a lot of moments that were really beautiful, that just felt really spontaneous.

And there were live moments where we're having fun performing for each other as if we were performing live in front of a crowd. Because sometimes I feel like in the studio, some of that can get lost. You can get nervous, or you can get too hyper-focused on things. We tried to have a really laid-back atmosphere, which I think really helped.

I imagine that helped the songs develop naturally, without any pressure.

Yeah, I think it really did. I had a ton of different ideas that we tried. So many different things. And seeing things work, or just some things don't work. That's kind of the fun thing, also, about it just being the five of us, is that it was fine if something didn't work. Because it was only us analyzing it, and not feeling the pressure or really feeling disappointed if something didn't work. We were able to just move on and to the next thing.

Why did the band pick the 64 Sound studio to record the album?

It felt like a classic, real homemade kind of feel to it. They've got some great gear in there. They really let us be in there and helped us set up and get going and stuff, and then left us alone, which was what we really wanted and needed.

We kind of need a room that's big enough where we can all sit in it and see each other. And the room was kind of the perfect size because it's not giant. It's a really nice-sized room we can fit a band in, and all band gear, and just have enough options to be able to get great sounds, and all play together in this really cool way.

At what point did you realize it would be such an existential album lyrically and thematically? Do you think you're better able to articulate your thoughts on these types of topics compared to past albums?

I'm not sure. it all just flows, or it doesn't, and I try not to question it. It just flows and then I have to spend time with it and nurture it and bring it into the real world and then let it flow some more. I'm not the kind of songwriter who can sit down and deliberately make something happen or change. It just has to be nurtured and then it will flow, or it will stop flowing. [Laughs.]

I have piles of really cool song ideas that I love where, for whatever reason, it just stopped flowing. But that's also the cool thing is that sometimes I'll pick up an old idea from ten years ago and it will start to flow again. Magic. Or not. [Laughs.]

<style>.embed-container { position: relative; padding-bottom: 56.25%; height: 0; overflow: hidden; max-width: 100%; } .embed-container iframe, .embed-container object, .embed-container embed { position: absolute; top: 0; left: 0; width: 100%; height: 100%; }</style><div class='embed-container'><iframe src='https://www.youtube.com/embed/CymKLVBbRAU' frameborder='0' allowfullscreen></iframe></div>

The album starts with "Regularly Scheduled Programming," which is about becoming numb to reality through technology. Why was that topic important to explore?

I just feel like we've all gotten swept away in this tidal wave of technology, and that we're all drowning. Drowning in social media, in streaming content and all this stuff that's supposed to make our lives better. I feel like social media is tearing us apart. And people forget their own dreams, and their own creativity, because they wash it all away each night, binge watching streaming and stuff like that. And I write that from being washed away myself. I found this moment where I saw how washed away I was getting.

I was missing out on so many great things and life. Missing out on nature, missing out on connecting with people that I love, and missing out on sitting and playing the guitar. Or meditating or reading a book. All these things that I feel like really connect us to our own souls, and to the soul of the planet and the universe, and the souls of each other, kind of reminding us that we're all one. And I feel like all of this technology is really separating us, and really making us all greedier. To lust for more followers, for more devices.

There is this illusion that social media makes us all more connected, when in fact it is ripping us and the planet apart, which is a shame, because social media could be a very helpful tool—if we could all learn to use it like a tool—literally check it out for five minutes a day or whatever. [We could use it] just to see what events, music, etcetera are happening or spread good messages for equality and progress and peace and love.

Instead, it becomes this terrible addiction designed to make as much money as it can off of you by making you feel as bad as possible and like you need the products they are pushing to make you feel better.

I think that is the problem at the heart of most of this new tech, which could be really great for us. Like music streaming—brilliant idea and a wonderful service but they still cannot pay artists fairly for their work. At the heart of all of this is greed.

I think in general a lot of what I am trying to say in my lyrics is really about trying to get folks to get off their devices and spend more time in nature and spend more time connecting with real people.

At least for me, spending more time in nature, meditating, and being with the people I love makes me feel like a healthier more creative person. And in "Regularly Scheduled Programming" I am just trying to say wake up to love before it is too late.

I really like the ["Regularly Scheduled Programming"]lyrics "Diamonds are growing in the garden / Raindrops are filling up the sea" and "One shot at redemption: a mighty and sacred love." Why did you pick those nature images?

I was trying to illustrate what folks were missing in the real world and out in nature while they were busy staring at their phones or devices. Like look at these beautiful dew drops in the garden! Or look at those same drops filling up the sea and keeping us all alive—the miracle of water!

I am trying to say in that song: "Look up! Look out! Look to nature and look within yourself! learn to love yourself! Look to love before it's too late!" There is also the message and a wish that we could be more responsible as we evolve. It is so sad to me that all of this tech could even be powered by nature—the sun, the wind and the water—but instead we are still chained to the greed of the fossil fuel industries and other destructive energetic methods.

With "Complex" you talk about the anxiety of feeling you're missing a piece of the puzzle. What about puzzles as a metaphor do you find appealing and fitting of recent times?

I think everyone can agree we live in complex times. The divide and conquer methods of this sort of extreme capitalism are working too well on people and we are being torn apart. People are taught to care more about the dollar than their fellow human being. We have all these bots and misinformation swirling on these social media platforms that folks spend hours a day on. How do we get out of this complex web we have found ourselves caught up in?

I am not saying I have it all figured out by any means. I struggle with it all too on a daily basis. But I do think one of the answers to the riddle for us all, no matter what side you may think you are on, is for us all to turn off the device and get out into nature. Or if for some reason you cannot get out into nature, turn off the device and just sit there. Just be and listen to what your soul and the universe really have to say.

"I do think one of the answers to the riddle for us all, no matter what side you may think you are on, is for us all to turn off the device and get out into nature… Just be and listen to what your soul and the universe really have to say." Jim James

"In Color" talks about the importance of everyone coming together no matter where they come from. Why is that important? What are some ways people can get to that goal?

"In Color" is just about celebrating our differences. The fact that there are so many wonderful beings of every shape, size, color, and belief should be seen as a great thing! And I think it really is. We should all be so happy that there are so many wondrous and amazing people of all walks of life that we can learn from and love. But instead, because of this classic divide and conquer B.S. that works so well, we end up with hate and division.

Again, I think it's time we start listening to real people more and get off the social media opinion streams and misinformation fountains of filth and hatred that spew forth from this monster called the internet that we have created.

Common Opens Up About 'A Beautiful Revolution Pt. 2,' Social Justice In The Mainstream & The Unceasing Spirit Of J Dilla

All photos courtesy of their respective artists

List

Producers Dan Auerbach, Cirkut, Dijon, Blake Mills and Sounwave each made significant contributions to the year in music — whether working on smash pop, R&B and hip-hop projects, or through their own efforts as artists.

See the full list of winners and nominees from the 2026 Grammys.

Watch highlights and exclusive Grammys content from the 2026 Grammys all year long.

Few roles in music are as mercurial, or as magical, as the producer. It’s a space where vision meets intuition, where creativity and craft interlock, where a single choice can transform a song into something transcendent.

The2026 GRAMMYSnominees for Producer Of The Year, Non-Classical, demonstrate that there is no single route to reaching that brilliance — either in terms of a producer’s career or their creative process. With three first-time nominees in the Category and two previous nominees, this group demonstrates that music can resonate deeply in innumerable ways.

Former Producer Of The Year winnerDan Auerbachchannels lived-in, visceral blues-rock, blending authenticity with innovation. The third nod may be the charm forBlake Mills, thanks to his Americana-tinged warmth and cinematic layering. Pop mainstay Cirkut marries precision and emotional sweep, whileDijoncrafts intimate, textural R&B that feels immediate and deeply personal. AndSounwave's cathartic and creatively audacious soundscapes that echo vital elements of hip-hop’s past while also inventing its future. Each nominee illustrates a different philosophy of production, yet all share a commitment to building massive emotion through small, precise choices.

Together, these nominees demonstrate that there is no single blueprint for producing greatness — only the courage to experiment, to listen differently, and to trust that sound itself can tell the story. From the visceral and raw to the expansive and meticulously crafted, each played a major role in the sound of the past 12 months.

Check out the nominees below and read the full2026 GRAMMYSnominations list ahead of Music's Biggest Night onSunday, Feb. 1, 2026.

A four-time nominee (and 2013 winner) for Producer Of The Year, Non-Classical, Dan Auerbach has spent more than two decades redefining what authenticity sounds like. While he’s most widely recognized as one half ofthe Black Keys, his impact as a producer has grown far beyond his own band’s orbit.

On the Keys’ latest record,No Rain No Flowers, Auerbach builds a humid atmosphere, letting the unvarnished performances echo the country blues that first inspired him as a teenager digging through his father’s record collection in Akron, Ohio. That same sense of immediacy and emotional rawness threads through his production last year, whether on Miles Kane’s smoky and soulful solo albumSunlight in the Shadows, or through his work with emerging artists like the Moonrisers andHermanos Gutiérrez,where Auerbach lets instinct and intimacy drive every take.

Auerbach’s approach to writing, performing, and producing is deeply informed by history. "Those [Chess] records sounded so fresh, so different," he toldDownbeat. "I loved blues music. I listened to video series on Lomax tapes on VHS and read his bookThe Land Where The Blues Began.And then Arhoolie Records." Like a sonic anthropologist, Auerbach channels the lineage of American roots music through a modern lens, capturing the essence of vintage recordings while never losing sight of melody, songcraft, or the real, living person behind the song.

From the crackling warmth of his Easy Eye Sound studio in Nashville, Auerbach continues to champion both legacy and discovery. His productions balance grit and grace, bridging old worlds and new voices. Whether working with chart-topping peers or underground innovators, he remains grounded in the belief that the best music doesn’t just sound good — itfeelslived-in.

Few producers are able to endlessly innovate and diversify, but the Toronto-born Henry Walter established that skill quickly. Cirkut helped shape entire eras of modern pop and R&B, with early collaborations ranging fromKaty Perry,Britney Spears, andKesha, toT-PainandAdam Lambert.

Cirkut may have been behind some of the most iconic singles of the last decade and a half, yet each new entry into that incredible catalog feels like its own new language, new sound, and new style. For Cirkut, such evolution isn’t optional — it’s instinct. "I never want to rest on my past accomplishments," he toldBillboard."Whether I’m working with the biggest star in the world or the newest artist, you have to prove yourself over and over again."

Cirkut contributed toLady Gaga’s adventurous new album,MAYHEM,with "Abracadabra" a towering display of versatility — a dark disco fever dream laced with analog synths and cinematic grandeur. WithRoséandBruno Mars’"APT.", he flips effortlessly into breezy funk-pop perfection, layering soulful vocals over a rhythm section that feels tailor-made for global airwaves. After one of the biggest years in his career, that open-minded, open-hearted collaborative spirit has led to Cirkut’s first Producer Of The Year, Non-Classical nomination.

Cirkut’s sound may have filled stadiums, but his approach remains personal and genuine. In anotherBillboardinterview, he beamed at the very idea of having worked with Lady Gaga: "I still kind of pinch myself. Like, ‘Wow, I helped produce a Gaga album.’ It’s really cool and I’m really proud."

Fifteen years in, Cirkut’s still chasing the same thrill that drew him to the turntables as a teenager — the magic of a perfect beat, a new sound, a song that makes the world feel bigger for three and a half minutes.

If you’ve ever heard Dijon speak in an interview, you get the sense that his enigmatic cool must bring a kind of calm to the studio, an unhurried, thoughtful steadiness that lets the music work on its own terms. That same energy shaped both his masterful 2025 album,Baby, and his cathartic collaboration withJustin BieberonSWAG— leading to his first nomination for Producer Of The Year, Non-Classical, his first GRAMMY nomination overall.

Dijon summarized his experience with Bieber in an interview withZane Lowe, reflecting on the fluidity of the process: "It was just so uncynical and unexpecting. It's not demanding and it's not entitled." The result is a record that somehow threads the line between pop maximalism and intimate experimentation, Dijon’s fingerprints felt in the bouncy rhythms and lithe instrumentation but never overpowering the mix.

The other album he’s recognized for,Babyis a culmination of Dijon's evolving individualism and artistry. His voice drifts between R&B murmur and folk confession, often collapsing the line between the two. The album at times feels like a performance for one, feeling fragile, human, and impossibly immediate. Songs bloom and crumble organically, room left for human imperfection that makes the music feel alive.

Those same instincts help ensure Bieber feels immediate and engaged onSWAG, whereas it could have easily tipped into pastiche. Tracks like "DAISIES" carry that signature sense of motion and vulnerability, music that sounds like it’s still discovering itself as it plays. "You're interacting with something that's finding its own footing," Dijon told Lowe. "You're one color in there. Typically I'd be pretty feverish about [controlling the final recording]... but there was a lot of love and respect."

Whether crafting his own introspective narratives or reframing a chart-topping mainstay, Dijon used the past year to establish himself as a star in the industry — a producer guided not by spectacle, but by feeling.

When producer and songwriter Blake Mills first connected with legendary bassistPino Palladinoduring sessions forJohn Legend's 2016 album,Darkness and Lighthe knew there was something to their connection. The relationship stretched into multiple duo albums, including 2025'sThat Wasn't a Dream, which highlighted Mills' ability to harness a sonic conversation between virtuosity and vulnerability.

Mills described that experience inThe Fader: "In pop music, there's a lot of fear-based streamlining — ‘Let's make it as uncomplicated and repetitive and easy to digest as possible,’" he said. "Both Pino and I have an appetite for finding things that are challenging and irresistible at the same time. We’re not necessarily complicating the norm; we’re subverting it." That fearless expression and experimentation has led Mills to his third nomination for Producer Of The Year, Non-Classical.

That ethos also runs through everything Mills has touched this year. OnJapanese Breakfast’sFor Melancholy Brunettes (& sad women), his production wrapsMichelle Zauner’s voice in a haze of trembling strings and gentle distortion like a sepia-tinged ray of sunlight pouring through stained glass. OnForever Is a Feeling, he helps raiseLucy Dacus’ timeless vocals and intimate lyrics into a wide expanse of radiant acoustics. Mills helps unlock a golden warmth toPerfume Genius' voice onGlory, creating a fragile architecture of noise and grace. And onThat Wasn’t A Dream, he and Palladino deliver something as vibrant and hypnotic as anything the elder statesman produced with the likes ofDon Henley,D'Angelo, orEric Clapton.

Whether working withBob DylanorFiona Apple, Blake Mills has long been known for a unique ability to help songs breathe — to find room to move, to shimmer, to see the life in art beyond the performative trappings. "For all artists, on some level, no matter how reclusive they are, what they want is attention. And that doesn’t mean success all the time," he toldPitchfork. "They want to be understood on their own terms. In the purest sense." Across genres, with young stars or legends, Mills’ work defies formulas and instead taps into the core of an artist’s expression with curiosity, rather than expectation.

Long before he became known as Sounwave, Mark Anthony Spears was producing tracks with a cheap drum machine, keyboard, and karaoke machine before moving onto"MTV Music Generator"for Sony Playstation and then his first MPC. And while his skill level has grown immensely in the years since — and recognized with six golden gramophones — Sounwave's  ingenuity and passion has led to some of the decade's catchiest  hip-hop, R&B, and pop productions.

Sounwave’s big break came as one of the in-house producers for Top Dawg Entertainment, most specifically working withKendrick Lamar. The two linked up on "A.D.H.D." from Kenny's debut, and later earned his first GRAMMY at the 2016 GRAMMYS when "Alright" took home Best Rap Song. "It’s just literally energy. That’s the main thing," he toldFaderwhen describing his creative process. "I just need something that pushes me outside of the box and outside of my comfort zone…Once I see that, I’m excited and locked in. I’m all in."

That certainly seems to be the case with his work on Lamar’s most recent album,GNX —resulting in Sounwave’s first nomination for Producer Of The Year, Non-Classical. After contributing to theworld-dominating "Not Like Us"in early 2024,GNXfeels like a victory lap, with Sounwave co-producing each of the album’s 12 tracks. The record pulls everything back into the soul of its author, and Sounwave’s position as a long-time collaborator and confidant helps realize that mission.GNXreaffirms Kendrick Lamar’s superiority in the genre in part by exalting the old-school swagger and expressive production that helped establish him in the first place.

Photo: STR/AFP via Getty Images

Feature

Latin American bands have made a lasting impact on metal throughout the decades, revolutionizing the genre by incorporating their own political and socioeconomic histories, regional instruments and different languages. Metal has never been the same since.

WhenSystem of a Downplayed their final show in São Paulo during their South American tour in May, videos from the concert went viral: Plumes of smoke, raging fires, massive mosh pits, and thousands of people filled the explosive videos as the GRAMMY-winning band played on stage.

On Instagram, the group posted footage of the concert and wrote, "This is not a war zone, this is not a riot, this is a SystemOfADown style rock and roll concert in Brazil!!!!!!!"

For Max Cavalera, co-founder of the pioneering Brazilian metal bandSepultura— and vocalist for bands Soulfly and Cavalera Conspiracy — the magnitude of the witnessed chaos does not surprise him.

"Some of the most memorable shows to me have been [in] Argentina, Brazil, Chile and then of course, Central America," he tells GRAMMY.com. "You put together the oppression of the country, the poverty, and once they're out in a show, they'regonnalet it all out, and that's why you see fires and s— like that that you normally would not see at a regular show. It's almost like the concert gives them permission to let all that out."

Cavalera's point is supported by the research and writings of Dr. Nelson Varas-Díaz, a professor of global and sociocultural studies at Florida International University. Dr. Varas-Díaz is a metal fan who's written books and academic articles on the genre, includingDecolonial Metal Music in Latin AmericaandSeeing Metal Music in Latin America and the Caribbean, the latter co-written with Dr. Daniel Nevárez Araújo. In his work, Dr. Varas-Díaz traces the evolution of metal in Latin American countries to reveal how the genre has been used as a creative tool of expression to critically challenge the legacy of colonialism and subvert systemic oppression.

He says the crowd's reaction at the System of a Down concert ultimately underscores the importance of heavy metal in the region. Butin order todeconstruct the phenomenon and understand why the music has had such a significant impact there, he says it's critical to recognize the heterogeneity of Latin American countries and key differences in their histories.

A post shared by System Of A Down (@systemofadown)

"Whenever the Global North thinks about Latin America or tries to conceptualize metal in Latin America, they think about the region as this uniform whole … they think about it as one thing," he tells GRAMMY.com. "But Latin America is a collection of different countries, and each one has their own particular history: cultural, political. Those dynamics are very different, and they yield themselves for different ways in which metal began in those scenes or changed in those settings."

Theorigins of metalcan be traced back to the late 1960s when English bands likeBlack Sabbathand Deep Purple fused blues and rock to create a more aggressive and heavier sound. When Black Sabbath released their self-titled 1970 debut album, theycultivated an influential style, which inspired countless bands, and by the mid-'70s, a new class of metal bands known as the new wave of British heavy metal (NWOBHM) had been birthed, with bands likeIron Maiden, Venom, Diamond Head, and others leading the sound. By the '80s, metal continued to evolve, andsubgenres like thrashcame to fruition, powered by the fast sounds of American bands likeMetallicaandMegadeth.

Despite the genre's predominant evolution in Europe, Dr. Varas-Díaz says there's a misconception that heavy metal arrived in Latin American countries much later than it did in the United States or other regions. He says that as bands were releasing music and cultivating various subgenres of metal, fans in Latin American countries were aware of these developments as they were unfolding.

"During the '80s, for example, the references of metal music that emanated from the Global North were kind of universal. If you were in any country in Latin America during the '80s, you were aware of the sheer number of bands that were coming out of Europe and the United States," he says. "So, there was a moment at the very onset of this huge, booming popularity where you could talk to people from different countries and we were consuming the same things."

This is true for Cavalera, who says that in 1981,Queenwere touring for their albumThe Gamewhen they made a pit stop in Brazil where he and his brother Igor witnessed the British rock band for the first time. He says the concert was life-changing, and it immediately introduced Cavalera and his brother to other hard rock and metal bands.

"Me and Igor became rock and rollers overnight right after that," he says. "We bought cassette tapes of Queen andKiss, and then we just wanted to know more bands like that, so we got intoJudas Priest,Van Halen, and got more into other bands. But yeah, Queen was the gateway band."

In 1984, Cavalera went on to createSepulturawith his brother, and initially, their music emulated the bands they were most inspired by. TheSepulturafrontman says they even decided to write their lyrics in English instead of Portuguesein an attempt toreach more metal fans beyond the borders of Brazil.

"For us as kids, our influences were more of the American and European bands; we wanted to sound like them. The only difference is, within a couple of years, we kind of realized that it's cool to sound like your heroes, but it's also very important to find your own voice and be original," Cavalera says.

Sepultura'squest for originality is one that many early Latin American metal bands were also experiencing as they began to rise across the region.

"There's a lot of people who believe that Latin Americans consumed metal music from the Global North in a passive manner, like we are receiving the bands from the north and we're just consuming them and imitating them, right?" Dr. Varas-Díaz says. "And there's some level of imitation early on, but the sheer speed at which metal music in Latin America is transformed through this Latin American filter that makes it sound different, integrates different instruments, is visually different from the Global North, and talks about different topics than metal in the Global North, that was almost immediate."

According to Dr. Varas-Díaz, many bands in Latin America were releasing similarly styled musicconcurrentto bands in the Global North. For example, in 1981, when Iron Maiden releasedKillers, the Argentine band Riff releasedRuedas de Metal("Wheels of Metal"), and in 1983, when Metallica'sKill 'Em Alldebuted, Arkangel in Venezuela releasedRepresiónLatinoamericana("Latin American Repression").

Though the music is not exactly alike, these same-year releases show that bands were taking inspiration from the samesourcematerial and producing stylistically similar sounds while instilling their own unique cultural elements. Dr. Varas-Díaz says many bands from Latin America innovated the genre by incorporating their own political and socioeconomic histories, regional instruments, and different languages.

"This was not, 'Let's wait and consume.' This thing reached Latin America and was immediately transformed," the metal author says.

InSepultura'scase, that transformation began to occur through their lyrics, when the band started writing more political music reflective of their environment in Brazil. Cavalera says that in his country, poverty, corrupt governments and oppression afflicted Brazilians, and in the aftermath of the country's military dictatorship — which began with the1964 Brazilian coup d'état, when military forces overthrew the president — generations like his continued to feel the ramifications of the country's deeply troubled history.

"We actually grew up later, but we remember this dictatorship. We know the stories of people being tortured in jails and the military coups and all that stuff. That was very, very fresh in our minds," he says. "We had all those military years of oppression, and we were scared to death of the police. All those things were real, and we grew up with all those elements, so I think all that really blended into the music and in the lyrics of the records."

Sepultura's1993 albumChaos A.D.signaled Cavalera's musical departure from earlier albums and showcased his pursuit to create something original and authentic to his experience growing up in Brazil.

"There's a huge change in my lyrics when you talk about records likeBeneath the RemainsandAriseand thenChaos A.D.Chaos A.D.was fully aware of social issues. That's why I wrote stuff like "Refuse/Resist" and "Propaganda" and "Clenched Fist"; those are high-powered social issues," he says.

Even beforeSepultura's1993 release, however, many Latin American bands were already writing about their lived experiences under dictatorships or corrupt governments. According to Dr. Varas-Díaz, Colombian bandMasacrewas singing about the waves of violence in the region, Brazil's Ratos dePorãowas writing about the burning of the Amazon, Argentina'sHerméticawas singing about police brutality against impoverished people, and in Chile, Warpath was writing about the Chilean dictatorship.

"While the Global North was singing about the problems of modernity like war, poverty — but singing about it in a very general manner — Latin Americans were thinking about the same thing in a very regional manner. So, it wasn't war like Sodom would write about war, or like Megadeth would write about war. [Instead,] it was the armed conflict in Peru, it was the armed conflict in Guatemala — it's very specific to the setting, to the region," he says.

Dr. Varas-Díaz believes that Argentina in particular — because of its storied political history and the bands that resulted from it — cultivated one of the most important metal scenes to ever materialize out of Latin America.

"It's a scene that was very organized from the beginning and had its own stamp of difference … there's this very working-class ethos in the way that the initial bands in Argentina conceptualized metal. If you think aboutHermética'sAcidoArgentino, it's a very Argentinean [metal] album," he says. "This is a scene that very rapidly created its own narrative, like, 'This is who we are, this is what we sing about.' And it was a very working-class type of narrative, very anti-government, reflective of the dictatorship, reflective of the killing of Indigenous peoples in the country and addressing those topics early on."

Although the political upheaval that marred many Latin American countries was a dominant force that heavily imbued the music that emerged from those areas, culture and heritage were also critical factors in the regional transformation of metal. Many bands incorporated traditional instruments native to their countries, like Peru'sKranium, whose music includes Andean instruments like thecharangoand thezampoña.

"What we know today as folk metal in Latin America we owe in great part toKraniumin Peru, who started using local instrumentation years before actually recording and releasing them," Dr. Varas-Díaz says.

Cavalera amalgamated his own culture with metal whenhe connected with his Brazilian heritageforSepultura's 1996 seminal albumRoots, which incorporated traditional elements from famed Brazilian percussionist Carlinhos Brown and featured the native Xavante tribe from Brazil's eastern state of Mato Grosso. Even now, Cavalera continues to infuse Indigenous themes into the genre with Soulfly's new albumChama— Portuguese for "flame" —released earlier this month.

"The cover is actually Apache warriors from the Navajo reservation in Arizona, and it's bridging my Brazilian roots with the Amazon all the way to the deserts of Arizona," Cavalera, who lives in Arizona, says.

Meanwhile, contemporary Latin American bands have continued to build on the music of their predecessors while championing their cultural identity through the genre.Crisálida, a metal and progressive rock band from Chile, say they merge their influences from bands like Leprous andTeserractwith the musical traditions of Chilean folk artists like Victor Jara, Violeta Parra, andQuilapayún. The latter are part of thenuevacanciónchilenagenre, a type of folk music that spread throughout Latin America in the '60s and '70s and became associated with leftist political movements.

For Crisálida's vocalist, CinthiaSantibáñez, the influence of thenuevacanciónchilenagenre proved to be the most impactful vehicle for telling Chile's cultural stories through the band's music.

"I sing the stories of my country, of what I feel is South American. My way of thinking centersonArgentina, Peru, Bolivia, Chile,"Santibáñeztold GRAMMY.com in an interview in Spanish. "I was born in thisland,I want to talk about my land."

Crisálida bassist BraulioAspéadds, "Music is art, and it's an expression from the soul, from our hearts, and that's why we don't want to do general heavy metal. We want to use our musical roots from here and we want to write about our history."

The band uses their music to explorethe folklorefrom their homeland. Their 2024 albumNiños Dioses("Child Gods") spotlights theCapacocharitual of the Inca empire, in which children made long treks into the Andes Mountains to be ultimately sacrificed to the gods.Aspésays the album has a "very powerful cultural context" and thatSantibañezfocused on conceptualizing the perspectives of the sacrificed children and their families.

"The instrumentation is very strong, very powerful, but also very soft. We worked a lot on the dynamics anddedicatethis album to the children,"Santibañezsays.

Dr. Varas-Díaz appreciates the contributions of bands like Crisálida to the metal genre, and he believes that bands from Latin America have ultimately made a profound impact on the worldwide metal scene. The phenomenon goes beyond simply hosting large concerts — bands from this region have created a lasting, influential legacy.

"When you think about metal in Latin America, instead of thinking about, 'Oh, the crowds are huge,' what we should be thinking about is, 'How has Latin America transformed metal from the Global North?' Because that's the main contribution that Latin America hasdonefor metal music in the Global North," Dr. Varas-Díaz reflects. "It integrated it, transformed it, and then put it out there in a completely different way, reflecting its cultural context and historical experiences."

Photo: Patrick Beaudry

Interview

Ahead of the CBS special "A GRAMMY Salute to Cyndi Lauper" on Oct. 5, the rock icon looks back on some of her most important career moments and how they've helped her stay true to herself.

Cyndi Lauperis no stranger to milestones. Along with being one of rock's most influential women, she has won two GRAMMYs (includingBest New Artist), delivered an Emmy-winning acting performance ("Mad About You"), produced a Tony-winning musical ("Kinky Boots"), and served as a major advocate for the LGBTQIA+ community and women around the world. And this year has marked a celebration of all that she's achieved.

In August, Lauper wrapped her globe-trotting, 68-date Girls Just Want to Have Fun Farewell Tour with two star-studded shows at the iconic Hollywood Bowl. On Oct. 5, fans will get to experience the night through "A GRAMMY Salute to Cyndi Lauper," which will air on CBS at 8 p.m. ET/PT and stream on Paramount+; the two-hour special will feature Lauper's performances alongsideJoni Mitchell,Cher,John Legend,SZA, and more, as well as additional video tributes fromBrandi Carlile,Ken EhrlichandHarvey Mason jr.

The Hollywood Bowl shows were just the beginning of a remarkable fall for Lauper. A few weeks after "A GRAMMY Salute," her new musical "Working Girl" (based on the 1988 film) will premiere at the Mandell Weiss Theatre at San Diego's famed LA Jolla Playhouse. Just 11 days later, she'll be inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, a moment fans have long been campaigning for.

It's a fitting series of events for Lauper, who has sold 50 million records over her nearly 50-year career — andher legacy extends far beyond her discography. She released a documentary in 2023 (Let the Canary Sing), that, along with her 2013 TV series (Still So Unusual) and 2012 self-titled memoir, have also offered displays of her fearlessness and vulnerability. She's long been passionate about activism, too, founding the nonprofitTrue Colors Unitedto help combat youth homelessness and theGirls Just Want To Have Fundamental Rights Fundto support women's rights and health (and cleverly call back to her most iconic hit).

While she may not be hitting the road again, Lauper's catalog isreportedto become an immersive theater experience, further cementing her impact. Toquoteher at the time of her documentary, "I'm not dead yet."

Ahead of "A GRAMMY Salute to Cyndi Lauper," the icon reflected on her career via email. Below, hear from Lauper on the CBS special, her farewell tour and some of her biggest moments from the past several years.

Your Farewell Tour was received with so much love. What did you feel you achieved with it that you hadn't in past tours?

I always wanted to do a big arena tour — to have the sets and lighting a certain way, to collaborate with other artists, both musically and visually. And I found a great partner in Brian Burke. He made my vision come to life.

The only goal I had was to celebrate the music, the fans and my friends. I am really lucky to have great friends who are not only talented but so generous with their time.

"A GRAMMY Salute to Cyndi Lauper: Live From the Hollywood Bowl" captured the final two shows. What were some filming highlights? And what do you see as the biggest benefit of broadcasting a show like that — for both those who were able to attend and those who weren't?

It wasn't nerve-wracking that it was being filmed, but it does add a layer that takes you out of the moment. But it was a great experience. We had an awesome team working behind the scenes and, again, I am so lucky to have great friends who joined me on stage.

There were a lot of places that we did not get to bring the Farewell Tour to, so I hope that this can make up for that. I want to share this moment with as many people as possible.

**The "GRAMMY Salute" is one of many milestones you've had in the past few years, including your 2023 documentary,Cyndi Lauper: Let the Canary Sing. Though you were hesitant at first, what unexpected positives came from sharing your story that way?**

It's another way to tell these stories. I think you reach a bigger audience with film and streaming. So many people have commented, "Wow, I didn't know that about you or I didn't realize you went through that." I always hope that people can take what I went through and use it for knowledge or inspiration in their own life.

Next up, your "Working Girl" musical will finally take the stage. What were the biggest challenges in writing the score, and did having so much time to develop it help, or did it make things harder?

Deadlines are always a challenge. You can't just pull a song out of thin air and you can't wait around until inspiration strikes you. Time is almost irrelevant when you're creating and writing. It's very intuitive and you have to follow your gut. That part of the process doesn't mesh well with a timing deadline.

I just hope that people like it and can relate to it. There are so many issues going on today that were going on 40 years ago. That sucks.

Your long-awaited Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction will happen shortly after "Working Girl" debuts. Your fans have campaigned for this moment for years. What does it mean to you personally?

It's always nice to get the recognition for your years of hard work. I appreciate the fans for believing in me and supporting me. That connection with the fans is really special.

To be able to express myself — both via music and socially, politically — that's what's important to me. To be able to use my platform to try and help make the world a little better.

What have been some of your fondest memories from the activism aspect of your career?

I think it is important for those of us who have a platform to use it to try and shine a light on injustices, inequalities, even if it means taking the heat. You have to be authentic to who you are. I was never one to just stand by and let something fly if it didn't seem right to me. And I have alienated some people along the way. I can't worry about that.

A lot of my fans are conservative and middle America, and I see the comments where people are telling me to shut up and sing. Hey, you have the right to say that. But it's not going to silence me.

You were also very honest in your 2012 memoir. Some artists describe writing a memoir as therapeutic, others as retraumatizing. For you, what were the positives — and the tougher moments — of putting your story on the page?

It was fine. Spilling some family secrets was a little nerve-wracking, especially since I was also doing a TV show at the time, "Still So Unusual." I worried how my mom would be affected. But I was true to myself. I told the stories that needed to be told.

The music business is not glamorous. You have to fight for yourself and your vision a lot and sometimes it means going to court. Sometimes it means making some misogynist dudes uncomfortable. But there are also really amazing things that happen along this journey. The places you go, the music you get to make, the friends you make along the way.

I read about your daily routine and it's inspiring — the discipline, the stamina. What are the key parts of your day-to-day life that have helped you continue to thrive nearly 50 years into your career?

You have to take your job seriously, whether you're a bus driver, a basketball player or a singer. If you want to be able to perform at your highest level, you have to be disciplined. If I want to be able to sing, I need to keep my instrument healthy. If I want to be able to run around the venue and roll around on the stage, I have to keep my body strong and limber. It's almost like reverse engineering it. And it's really second nature. Do you ever question brushing your teeth?

You're just one step away from an EGOT. Do you have any interest in pursuing a project that might put you in the running for an Oscar?

The Oscar is not the goal but, of course, it would be nice. I'm always open to interesting projects.

Photo: Heidi Stanton

List

In October, the GRAMMY Museum welcomes a dynamic roster of artists to Los Angeles and New York City — including Good Charlotte, Addison Rae, Leon Thomas, Mt. Joy, and more — for intimate conversations and performances.

This October, the GRAMMY Museum celebrates advocates, legends, and rising stars across genres.

Frommgk’sLost Americanarooftop debut to a discussion withBilly IdolandSteve Stevensabout their collaborative albumDream Into It, programming spans punk nostalgia, boundary-pushing K-pop, indie rock, and fresh voices redefining pop. Fans can attend exclusive evenings featuring intimate performances, album spotlights, and candid conversations with influential artists — includingGood Charlotte,Addison Rae,Leon Thomas,Lucy Dacus,Mt. Joy,andHAIM.

Whether you’re reliving legendary anthems or discovering the next wave of breakout talent, the GRAMMY Museum’s October lineup promises unforgettable nights for every kind of music lover.

Oct. 1, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Join the Waitlist

The GRAMMY Museum welcomes GRAMMY-nominated artist mgk to the Museum for an evening celebrating his latest album release,Lost Americana.

Mgk is a multi-platinum recording artist who has become a force in music, entertainment, film, and fashion. The Cleveland native broke genre barriers with his 2020 rock/pop-punk albumTickets to My Downfall, which debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 and produced platinum singles "bloody valentine" and "my ex’s best friend."

He followed withmainstream sellout, another Billboard 200 No. 1 that earned a GRAMMY nomination for Best Rock Album and supported a sold-out world tour, including a record-breaking 50,000-seat hometown show at Cleveland’s Huntington Bank Stadium. Released Aug. 8,Lost Americana, marks his seventh Top 10 release and his third consecutive No. 1 on the rock and alternative charts.

Oct. 2, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Join the Waitlist

The GRAMMY Museum is pleased to spotlight the chart-topping music ofKPop Demon Huntersand welcome the team behind the soundtrack — GRAMMY-nominated producerIan Eisendrath(Music Supervisor, Record Producer), EJAE (Artist/Writer), Dana Sano (Soundtrack Album Producer, Executive Music Consultant), and Spring Aspers (Soundtrack Album Producer, President, Music at Sony Pictures) — to the Museum’s Clive Davis Theater for a special discussion about their creative process. The conversation will be moderated byVariety’s Thania Garcia.

A Netflix film from Sony Pictures Animation,KPop Demon Huntershas become a global phenomenon — the soundtrack debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200 and has already surpassed 3 billion streams worldwide. Its breakout single "Golden" has spent five consecutive weeks at No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100, making fictional K-pop group HUNTR/X the first fictional act to top the chart sinceEncanto, and thefirst female group to do so since Destiny’s Child in 2001. Acclaimed by critics and fans alike, the film is now Netflix’s most popular film of all time.

Oct. 2, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

N.Y.C.

Join the Waitlist

The GRAMMY Museum is thrilled to welcome Mt. Joy to the Loreto Theater at the Sheen Center for Thought & Culture in New York City for a special evening celebrating their latest albumHope We Have Fun.

Since forming in 2016, Mt. Joy — comprised of Matt Quinn, Sam Cooper, Jackie Miclau, Sotiris Eliopoulos, and Michael Byrnes — has risen from indie upstarts to arena headliners. With more than one billion global streams, multiple Top 5 AAA radio hits ("Silver Lining," "Lemon Tree," "Highway Queen"), and sold-out shows at Madison Square Garden, Red Rocks, and beyond, the Philadelphia-born band has built a reputation for soulful, roots-driven songwriting and unforgettable live performances.

Mt. Joy released their fourth album,Hope We Have Fun, in May 2025, an effort that explores both the excitement and difficulties of life on tour. The record ranges from the upbeat single "She Wants to Go Dancing" to the reflective "More More More." The band is now launching its largest North American tour to date and is slated to perform at major festivals including Governor’s Ball, Bonnaroo, and Newport Folk Festival.

Oct. 03, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Join the Waitlist

The GRAMMY Museum is thrilled to welcome Good Charlotte for an evening celebrating their latest albumMotel Du Cap. The program — moderated by Apple Music’sTravis Mills— will feature a discussion about their creative process and career, followed by a special performance.

For nearly three decades, brothers Joel Madden (vocals) and Benji Madden (guitar) have led Good Charlotte as genre-bending, multi-platinum rock superstars. From their humble beginnings in Waldorf, Maryland, to global success with hits like "Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous" and "The Anthem," the band has sold more than 11 million albums worldwide and earned over 2.3 billion streams to date. The Maddens’ creative reach has expanded into collaborations with artists including 5 Seconds of Summer,Pharrell Williams,Bishop Briggs, andAll Time Low.

Oct. 4, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

N.Y.C.

Join the Waitlist

The GRAMMY Museum is thrilled to welcomeAddison Raeto National Sawdust in Brooklyn, NY, for a special evening celebrating her debut albumAddison.

Released in June to critical acclaim,Allisonwas hailed byForbesas pop music’s "newest it girl." Singles like "Diet Pepsi" — her Billboard Hot 100 debut — "Aquamarine," "High Fashion," "Headphones On," and "Fame is a Gun" have showcased her rise as one of pop’s most recognizable new voices.

Beyond music, Addison has made her mark on film, starring in films such asHe’s All ThatandThanksgiving, and joining the upcomingAnimal Friendsopposite Ryan Reynolds, Jason Momoa, and Aubrey Plaza. With over 88 million TikTok followers and more than 34 million on Instagram, Addison Rae continues to redefine what it means to be a multi-platform star stepping confidently into her next chapter as a musician.

Oct. 6, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Join the Waitlist

The GRAMMY Museum is honored to welcome hit-making artist, songwriter, and producer Leon Thomas to the Museum for an evening celebrating his latest album,MUTT.

The GRAMMY-winning Brooklyn native has quickly become one of R&B’s most compelling voices. His 2023 debutElectric Duskfeatured collaborations withVictoria Monét,Benny the Butcher, andTy Dolla $ign, while his sophomore albumMUTTwas lauded as Billboard’s No. 1 R&B Album of 2024. That release produced the platinum-certified title track, which topped Hot R&B Songs and broke into the Hot 100’s Top 20. This May, Thomas releasedMUTT Deluxe: HEEL, featuringKehlani,Big Sean, andHalle.

Thomas has since been recognized as Billboard’s Breakthrough Artist of the Year, MTV PUSH’s Artist of the Month, and the 2025 BET Awards’ Best New Artist. Beyond music, he’s appeared onVictoriousandInsecure. The Recording Academy recently named Thomas theArtist Ambassador for Music Advocacy Day 2025.

Oct. 7, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Buy Tickets

The GRAMMY Museum is thrilled to welcome John Fogerty to the Ray Charles Terrace for an evening celebrating his new albumLegacy: The Creedence Clearwater Revival Years.

A GRAMMY winner with multiple inductions into theGRAMMY Hall of Fame, Fogerty has shaped American music for more than five decades. From his groundbreaking work withCreedence Clearwater Revival— which produced classics such as "Proud Mary," "Fortunate Son" and "Have You Ever Seen the Rain" — to his solo career, Fogerty's unique  sound fuses rock, blues, country, and R&B with impeccable catchiness. His career achievements include eight GRAMMY nominations, a win forBlue Moon Swamp, and induction into the Baseball Hall of Fame for his anthem "Centerfield."

This milestone year, which also marks his 80th birthday, brings the release ofLegacy: The Creedence Clearwater Revival Years, featuring newly re-recorded renditions of 20 of his most beloved songs. Inspiration for the project began in 2023, when Fogerty reclaimed ownership of his publishing after decades of legal battles. "I’m 80 years old," he said. "I’m giving myself a gift with this album—and I’m giving my fans a gift at the same time."

Oct. 8, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Join the Waitlist

The GRAMMY Museum welcomes GRAMMY-winning singer/songwriter, guitarist, and producer Lucy Dacus for an evening celebrating her latest albumForever Is a Feeling. Dacus first emerged from Richmond, Virginia, with her debutNo Burden(2016), and quickly gained acclaim withHistorian(2018) andHome Video(2021), which reflected on childhood and adolescence with her signature storytelling style.

Beyond her solo work, she teamed up withPhoebe BridgersandJulien Bakerto formboygenius, whose 2023 albumthe recordwon three GRAMMY Awards and cemented the trio as a defining voice of the era. WithForever Is a Feeling(2025), her major-label solo debut, Dacus turns her attention to the complexities of love, desire, and romance on a grand scale. The album is both an intimate reflection and a sweeping attempt to capture the elusive, fleeting feeling of "forever," underscoring why she remains one of today’s most fearless and compelling artists.

Oct. 9, 2025 from 7:30 p.m to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Join the Waitlist

Billy Idol and his longtime collaborator, guitarist and co-songwriter Steve Stevens will visit the Museum for an evening celebrating their new albumDream Into It. The program will include a conversation about their creative process and a live acoustic performance.

Billy Idol has remained one of rock’s most recognizable voices for more than four decades — first as the frontman of  Generation X in the late ’70s, then as a solo artist with guitarist Steve Stevens in 1982. Blending punk attitude with rock ’n’ roll swagger, Idol helped define an era, while his partnership with Stevens has become one of music’s most enduring collaborations.Dream Into Itcontinues that evolution and has earned praise from fans and critics alike as proof that Idol’s legacy is still unfolding.

Oct.9, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

N.Y.C

Buy Tickets

The GRAMMY Museum’s New York City program series continues with indie rock duo Royel Otis, who will appear at the Loreto Theater at the Sheen Center for Thought & Culture to discuss  their new album,hickey.

Formed in 2019 in Sydney, Australia, Royel Otis — comprised of Royel Maddell and Otis Pavlovic — have quickly become one of indie rock’s breakout acts for their sharp mix of melody, humor, and undeniable chemistry. Their debut EPs introduced a playful, hook-driven sound that earned global attention, while their 2024 debut albumPRATTS & PAINcemented their reputation with standout tracks like "Fried Rice" and "Foam." That same year, their viralTriple JLike A Versioncoverof Sophie Ellis-Bextor’s "Murder on the Dancefloor" became a cultural phenomenon, climbing multiple Billboard charts, and landing at No. 2 on Triple J’s Hottest 100.

The band has since achieved over 220 million global streams with their cover of theCranberries’ "Linger," played more than 100 sold-out shows worldwide, and swept the 2024 ARIA Awards with four wins, including Best Rock Album and Best Group.

Oct. 11, 2025 from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m.

L.A.

Buy Tickets

Sensory Friendly Saturday takes place on the second Saturday of every month, offering families the chance to explore the Museum in a calmer environment. During these special hours, from 9 to 11 a.m., sound levels are lowered, lighting is softened, and crowds are reduced to create a more comfortable experience. Tickets can be purchased in advance online for the selected Saturday or at the Museum upon arrival.

Oct. 13, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Join the Waitlist

The GRAMMY Museum is thrilled to welcome HAIM to the Museum for a special evening celebrating their latest albumI Quit. Formed in Los Angeles, HAIM — sisters Este, Danielle, and Alana — HAIM's 2020 albumWomen in Music Pt. IIIearned a GRAMMY nomination for Album Of The Year and cemented their reputation for blending rock, pop, and R&B influences with electrifying live performances.

Released in May 2025,I Quitis the trio’s fourth album and their most unrestrained work to date. Co-produced by Danielle Haim and longtime collaboratorRostam Batmanglij, the record explores themes of reinvention and resilience, capturing both the band’s explosive live energy and inventive studio experimentation. HAIM are currently on a North American headlining tour, with UK dates to follow in October.

Oct. 15, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Buy Tickets

To mark the 50th anniversary ofThe Rocky Horror Picture Show, the GRAMMY Museum will host a special evening in the Clive Davis Theater. First released in 1975,The Rocky Horror Picture Showbecame the longest-running film in theatrical distribution and a cultural phenomenon, celebrated for its groundbreaking soundtrack and enduring influence on music and pop culture.

This anniversary program brings together key figures behind its creation and legacy, including producerLou Adler,  Creative DirectorDavid Gorman, legendary actorTim Curry, and multi-GRAMMY-winning composerDavid Fosterin a conversation moderated by Fat Mike about the music behind the cult classic, followed by an audience Q&A.

Oct.16, 2025 from 7:30 p.m. to 9 p.m.

L.A.

Buy Tickets

In celebration of his new albumNot Everyone Can Go, the GRAMMY Museum will host an evening with Braxton Cook featuring a discussion of his career and creative process, followed by a performance.

Braxton Cook is one of today’s most versatile musicians, known for defying genre and collaborating with artists includingTaylor Swift,Jon Batiste,Giveon, andMasego. He has toured the world multiple times — making his Blue Note Tokyo debut in 2024 — earned an Emmy Award and NAACP Image Award nomination, and appeared six times on NPR’s famed Tiny Desk Concert series.

As Cook noted,Not Everyone Can Gois "a reminder to myself and others to take stock in what it is you have and be grateful for the breath in your lungs. It's like, Man, I'm alive. I got up today. I have two beautiful kids. And, it's going to be alright."

Oct.20, 2025 from 7 p.m. to 8:30 p.m.

L.A.

Buy Tickets

The GRAMMY Museum celebratesTom Petty’s 75th birthday with a special screening of the award-winning documentarySomewhere You Feel Free: The Making of Wildflowers. The program will also feature a conversation with director Mary Wharton, Benmont Tench, George Drakoulias, Adria Petty, and Jim Scott, moderated by SiriusXM’s Mark Felsot.

Drawing from a trove of never-before-seen 16mm film discovered in Tom Petty’s archive in 2020, the documentary explores the making of Petty’s 1994 masterpieceWildflowers, his first collaboration with producerRick Rubin. Blending archival footage with new interviews, the 89-minute film captures both the creative process and the personal transitions that shaped the record.

Since premiering at SXSW in 2021, it has earned multiple awards and critical acclaim as an intimate, unvarnished portrait of one of rock’s most enduring artists.

Oct. 21, 2025 from 7 p.m. to 8:30 p.m.

L.A.

Buy Tickets

The GRAMMY Museum presents a special screening of the documentaryJanis Ian: Breaking Silence, followed by an intimate conversation with 10-time GRAMMY nomineeJanis Ianand Emmy-winning director Varda Bar-Kar.

A fearless singer/songwriter since her teenage years, Ian has built a groundbreaking career that spans more than six decades, earning GRAMMY wins for "At Seventeen" and her spoken word autobiographySociety’s Child. With nominations across eight different Categories, she remains one of the most versatile artists of her generation. Her latest nomination forThe Light at the End of the Linein 2023 brought her career full circle, underscoring her enduring impact.

Directed by Varda Bar-Kar,Janis Ian: Breaking Silenceexplores Ian’s life, songwriting, and legacy as an artist who gave voice to social issues long before it was commonplace. The film, which made its broadcast premiere on PBS’ "American Masters" in June 2025, features appearances fromJoan Baez,Arlo Guthrie,Lily Tomlin,Jean Smart, Laurie Metcalf, and more.